Add `v1` version of the Strimzi API and the related conversion tool (#12014)
strimzi/strimzi-kafka-operator: v1-api-conversion/README.md

Reviewer: Do you think it would be worth mention how you can use it/download it? I mean, you can have the binary which you can download, or possibly use the binary in the operators image.

# `v1` API Conversion CLI Tool

With Strimzi's CRD evolving, there needs to be a way to easily migrate existing custom resource configuration to the new CRD schema.
That is why we introduced the `v1` version of the schema, which removes several deprecated fields.
To make it as easy as possible to convert existing Strimzi custom resources, a conversion tool is provided.

The tool can operate in two modes:
* Converting YAML files
* Converting Kubernetes resources

> * Upgrading CRDs to v1

Reviewer 2: Shall we recommend a sequence? 
> Convert all custom resources before upgrading the CRDs.

> You can list the available features using the `help` command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can list the tool's commands using `help`:
```

```
> bin/api-conversion.sh help
Usage: bin/api-conversion.sh [-hV] [COMMAND]
Conversion tool for Strimzi Custom Resources
  -h, --help      Show this help message and exit.
  -V, --version   Print version information and exit.
Commands:
  help                                     Displays help information about the specified command
  convert-file, cf                         Convert Custom Resources from YAML file
  convert-resource, cr, convert-resources  Convert Custom Resources directly in Kubernetes
  crd-upgrade, crd                         Upgrades the Strimzi CRDs and CRs to use v1beta2 version
```

> ## Converting YAML files with custom resources

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Converting custom resource YAML files
```

> One way to use the tool is to convert YAML files. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One way to use the tool is to convert custom resource YAML files. 
```

> The converted YAML files can be applied to your Kubernetes cluster either directly or for example using GitOps mechanism.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Apply the converted YAML to your cluster directly or using a GitOps mechanism.
```

The input YAML file is specified using the `--file` option.

By default, the converted YAML is printed to standard output.
You can use the `--in-place` option to write the converted YAML into the original source file.
Alternatively, you can create a new YAML file for the conversion using the `--output` option.

The following example commands show how the tool is used:

```
# Convert input.yaml and print the converted resource to standard output
bin/api-conversion.sh convert-file --file input.yaml

> # Read resources from input.yaml, convert it, and store it in input.yaml

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Read resources from input.yaml, convert, and write back to input.yaml
```

       [-o=<outputFile> | [--in-place]]
Convert Custom Resources from YAML file
  -d, --debug              Runs the tool in debug mode
  -f, --file=<inputFile>   Specifies the YAML file for the custom resource being converted
      --in-place           Applies the changes directly to the input file
                             specified by --file
      -ll, --log-level=<level>
                           Sets the log level to enable logging
  -o, --output=<outputFile>
                          Creates an output YAML file for the converted custom resource
```

**When you have converted the YAML files, apply the changes to Kubernetes using `kubectl apply -f` or `kubectl replace -f`.** 

## Converting Kubernetes resources

You can also use the tool to convert Strimzi custom resources directly in your Kubernetes cluster.

You can use the `--kind` option to specify one or more kinds of Strimzi resources.
If you do not specify any kind, the tool will convert Strimzi resources of all kinds.

The `--namespace` option targets the custom resources in a specified namespace for conversion.
You can also use `--all-namespace` to convert resources in the whole Kubernetes cluster.

> If  `--namespace` and `--all-namespace` are not specified, your current namespace is used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If  `--namespace` or `--all-namespace` is not specified, your current namespace is used.
```

If you want to convert only one resource, you can also use a combination of `--name` and `--kind` options.

The following example commands show how the tool is used:

```
# Converts all Strimzi resources in current namespace
> bin/api-conversion.sh convert-resource

# Converts all Strimzi resources in all namespace
> bin/api-conversion.sh convert-resource --all-namespaces

# Converts all Strimzi resources in namespace my-kafka

> > bin/api-conversion.sh convert-resource --namespaces my-kafka

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> bin/api-conversion.sh convert-resource --namespace my-kafka
```

# Convert only Kafka resources in all namespaces
> bin/api-conversion.sh convert-resource --all-namespaces --kind Kafka

# Convert only Kafka and Kafka Connect resources in all namespaces
> bin/api-conversion.sh convert-resource --all-namespaces --kind Kafka --kind KafkaConnect

# Convert Kafka cluster named my-cluster in namespace my-kafka
> bin/api-conversion.sh convert-resource --kind Kafka --namespace my-kafka --name my-cluster
```

You can also list the help for the resource conversion:

```
> bin/api-conversion.sh help convert-resource
Usage: bin/api-conversion.sh convert-resource [-d] [-ll=<level>]
       [--name=<name>] [-k[=<kinds> [<kinds> [<kinds> [<kinds> [<kinds>
       [<kinds> [<kinds> [<kinds> [<kinds> [<kinds>]]]]]]]]]]]...
       [-n=<namespace> | [-a]]
Convert Custom Resources directly in Kubernetes
  -a, --all-namespaces   Converts resources in all namespaces
  -d, --debug            Runs the tool in debug mode
  -k, --kind[=<kinds> [<kinds> [<kinds> [<kinds> [<kinds> [<kinds> [<kinds>

>         [<kinds> [<kinds> [<kinds>]]]]]]]]]]

Author: This looks indeed strange. But I'm afraid that this is auto-generated by the command line parser. So there is not much I can do about it :-/

                         Specifies the kinds of custom resources to be
                           converted, or converts all resources if not specified
      -ll, --log-level=<level>
                         Sets the log level to enable logging
  -n, --namespace=<namespace>
                         Specifies a Kubernetes namespace or OpenShift project,
                           or uses the current namespace if not specified
      --name=<name>      Name of the resource which should be converted (can be
                           used onl with --namespace and single --kind options)
```

### Required access rights

To convert the resources directly in your Kubernetes cluster, you must run the tool as a user with RBAC permission to:

* Get the Strimzi custom resources you are going to convert (when using the `--name` option)
* List the Strimzi custom resources you are going to convert (when not using the `--name` option)

> * Replace the Strimzi custom resources you are going to convert

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Get Strimzi custom resources when using the `--name` option
* List Strimzi custom resources when not using the `--name` option
* Replace Strimzi custom resources you are going to convert
```

> ## Upgrading CRDs to v1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Upgrading CRDs to `v1`
```

Once the custom resources are ready, you can use the `crd-upgrade` subcommand to upgrade the CRDs.
The following example command shows how the tool is used:

```
# Upgrade the Strimzi CRDs to v1
> bin/api-conversion.sh crd-upgrade
```

**After you have upgraded the CRDs to use `v1` as storage version, you must only use the fields available in `v1` in your custom resources.**

### Required access rights

To upgrade the Strimzi CRDs to `v1`, you must run the tool as a user with RBAC permission to:

* List the Strimzi custom resources in all namespaces
* Replace the Strimzi custom resources in all namespaces
* Patch the CRD resources
* Replace the status of the CRD resources

## List of changes to the Strimzi custom resources in the `v1` API version

### `Kafka` CR

#### Requiring manual conversion

The following changes cannot be done by the conversion tool and have to be applied manually. 

* The `.spec` section is required and have to be present.
* `type: oauth` authentication is not supported in the `v1` API.
  Use `type: custom` authentication instead.
* The `secrets` property in `type: custom` authentication is not supported in the `v1` API.

>   Use the `template` section instead to mount custom Secrets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Use the `template` section instead to mount custom secrets.
```

* The `type: keycloak` and `type: opa` authorizations are not supported anymore.
  Use `type: custom` authorization instead.
* The `.spec.kafka.resources` property is not supported in the `v1` API.
  Configure resource requests and limits in your `KafkaNodePool` resources.

#### Supporting automatic conversion

The following changes can be done manually or using the conversion tool.

* Change the `apiVersion` to `kafka.strimzi.io/v1`.
* Delete the `.spec.zookeeper` section.
  ZooKeeper-based Apache Kafka clusters are not supported anymore.
* Delete the `.spec.jmxTrans` section.
  JMX Trans is not supported anymore.

> * Delete the following Kafka properties which are nto supported anymore:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Delete the following Kafka properties which are not supported anymore:
```

  The value should be the original value of `reconciliationIntervalSeconds` times 1000.
* In YAML files that include the status section, remove the `.status.registeredNodeIds`, `.status.kafkaMetadataState`, and `.status.listeners[].type` fields.
  This conversion is not needed for any resources that exist in your Kubernetes cluster and are managed by Strimzi Cluster Operator.

### `KafkaConnect` CR

#### Requiring manual conversion

The following changes cannot be done by the conversion tool and have to be applied manually.

* The `.spec` section is required and have to be present.
* `type: oauth` authentication is not supported in the `v1` API.
  Use `type: custom` authentication instead.
* `.spec.externalConfiguration` is not supported in the `v1` API.
  Use the `.spec.template` section instead to add custom volumes or environment variables.

#### Supporting automatic conversion

The following changes can be done manually or using the conversion tool.

* The `.spec.replicas` field is required in the `v1` API.

>   If you do not have it in your `KafkaConnect` custom resource, add it and set it to `3`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  If you do not have it in your `KafkaConnect` custom resource, add it and set it to `3` (recommended).
```

Author: In this case, it is not the recommended value. The current default is `3`. So if the `replicas` field is not set, the user has today 3 replicas and has to set it to `3` replicas during the conversion.

  * For `.spec.target.statusStorageTopic` use the `status.storage.topic` field from the `config` section of the target cluster or set it to `mirrormaker2-cluster-status`.
  * Remove the value from the `config` section of the target cluster afterward.

### `KafkaBridge` CR

#### Requiring manual conversion

The following changes cannot be done by the conversion tool and have to be applied manually.

* The `.spec` section is required and have to be present.
* `type: oauth` authentication is not supported in the `v1` API.
  Use `type: custom` authentication instead.

#### Supporting automatic conversion

The following changes can be done manually or using the conversion tool.

* The `.spec.replicas` field is required in the `v1` API.
  If you do not have it in your `KafkaBridge` custom resource, add it and set it to `1`.
* `type: jaeger` tracing is not supported and should be removed.
* The `.spec.enableMetrics` property is not supported in the `v1` API and should be removed.
  If you have it set to `true`, please use `.spec.metricsConfig` instead.

>   The automatic conversion of the `enableMetrics` property will automatically create a new Config Map with the metric configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The automatic conversion of the `enableMetrics` property will create a new `ConfigMap` with the metric configuration.
```

### `KafkaConnector` CR

#### Requiring manual conversion

The following changes cannot be done by the conversion tool and have to be applied manually.

* The `.spec` section is required and have to be present.

#### Supporting automatic conversion

The following changes can be done manually or using the conversion tool.

* The `.spec.pause` property is not supported in the `v1` API and should be removed.

>   If you have paused connector (the `pause` property set to `true`), change it to `state: paused`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  If the connector is paused (the `pause` property set to `true`), change it to `state: paused`.
```

### `KafkaRebalance` CR

#### Requiring manual conversion

The following changes cannot be done by the conversion tool and have to be applied manually.

> * The `.spec` section is required and have to be present.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The `.spec` section is required and must be present.
```

#### Supporting automatic conversion

The following changes can be done manually or using the conversion tool.

* The `overrides` property in storage configuration (`.spec.storage`) is not supported in the `v1` API and should be removed.
  Use multiple different `KafkaNodePool` resources instead if you need different storage configuration for different nodes.

### `KafkaTopic` CR

#### Requiring manual conversion

The following changes cannot be done by the conversion tool and have to be applied manually.

* The `.spec` section is required and have to be present.

### `KafkaUser` CR

#### Requiring manual conversion

The following changes cannot be done by the conversion tool and have to be applied manually.

* The `.spec` section is required and have to be present.

#### Supporting automatic conversion

The following changes can be done manually or using the conversion tool.

* The `operation` field in `.spec.authorization.acls[]` is not supported in the `v1` API and should be removed
  Use the `operations` array instead.
  **This conversion needs to be done BEFORE upgrading to Strimzi 0.49-0.51.**

### `StrimziPodSet` CR

> The `StrimziPodSet` is internal Strimzi resource and should not be used directly by any Strimzi users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `StrimziPodSet` is an internal Strimzi resource and should not be used directly by any Strimzi users.
```

You should not need to worry about converting it.

> The following changes are listed _just-in-case_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following changes are listed for completeness.
```

# Strimzi `v1` API Conversion Tool

Strimzi’s Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) have been updated to remove deprecated fields in the new `v1` schema. 
To support this transition, we've introduced a CLI-based API conversion tool. 

The tool supports two main operations:
* Converting existing custom resources to the `v1` schema before upgrading the CRDs:
    * From YAML files (`convert-file`)
    * Directly in your Kubernetes cluster (`convert-resource`)
* Upgrading CRDs by replacing existing Strimzi CRDs with their `v1` equivalents (`crd-upgrade`)

You can list the tool's commands using `help`:

```

> > bin/api-conversion.sh help

Reviewer 3: I guess that starting from here, all the examples should have `v1-api-conversion.sh` and not `api-conversion.sh`. Or am I missing anything here?
